### LVs link genes that alter lipid accumulation with relevant traits and tissues

In our initial experiment, we aimed to determine if genes within a disease-relevant LV could serve as potential therapeutic targets.
To achieve this, we utilized a fluorescence-based CRISPR-Cas9 approach in the HepG2 cell line, leading to the identification of 462 genes linked to lipid regulation.
Two distinct gene sets were then selected based on their impact on lipids: a lipids-decreasing gene-set comprising eight genes (*BLCAP*, *FBXW7*, *INSIG2*, *PCYT2*, *PTEN*, *SOX9*, *TCF7L2*, *UBE2J2*), and a lipids-increasing gene-set consisting of six genes (*ACACA*, *DGAT2*, *HILPDA*, *MBTPS1*, *SCAP*, *SRPR*) (Supplementary Data 2).


![
**Tissues and traits associated with a gene module related to lipid metabolism (LV246).**
<!--  -->
**a)** Top cell types/tissues in which LV246's genes are expressed.
Values in the $y$-axis come from matrix $\mathbf{B}$ in the MultiPLIER models (Figure {@fig:entire_process}b, see Methods).
In the $x$-axis, cell types/tissues are sorted by the maximum sample value.
<!--  -->
**b)** Gene-trait associations (unadjusted $p$-values from S-MultiXcan [@doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1007889]; threshold at -log($p$)=10) and colocalization probability (fastENLOC) for the top traits in LV246.
The top 40 genes in LV246 are shown, sorted by their LV weight (matrix $\mathbf{Z}$), from largest (the top gene *SCD*) to smallest (*FAR2*);
*DGAT2* and *ACACA*, in boldface, are two of the six high-confidence genes in the lipids-increasing gene set from the CRISPR screen.
Cardiovascular-related traits are in boldface.
<!--  -->
SGBS: Simpson Golabi Behmel Syndrome;
CH2DB: CH<sub>2</sub> groups to double bonds ratio;
HDL: high-density lipoprotein;
RCP: locus regional colocalization probability.
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_analysis/lv246/lv246.svg "LV246 TWAS plot"){#fig:lv246 width="100%"}


We analyzed all 987 LVs using Fast Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (FGSEA), identifying 15 LVs with nominal enrichment (unadjusted *P* < 0.01) for lipid-altering gene-sets (Tables 1 and 2).
Among LVs with reliable sample metadata, LV246 stood out as the top LV associated with the lipids-increasing gene-set, showing genes primarily co-expressed in adipose tissue (Figure 1a).
This tissue plays a crucial role in coordinating and regulating lipid metabolism.
Through our regression framework across all traits in PhenomeXcan, we found that gene weights for LV246 predicted associations with plasma lipids, high cholesterol, and Alzheimer's disease (Table 3, FDR < 1e-23).
These lipid-related associations were replicated across the 309 traits in eMERGE (Table 4), where LV246 showed significant associations with hypercholesterolemia (phecode: 272.11, FDR < 4e-9), hyperlipidemia (phecode: 272.1, FDR < 4e-7), and disorders of lipoid metabolism (phecode: 272, FDR < 4e-7).


Two high-confidence genes identified in our CRISPR screening, *DGAT2* and *ACACA*, encode enzymes for triglycerides and fatty acid synthesis and were among the highest-weighted genes in LV246.
However, unlike other members of LV246, *DGAT2* and *ACACA* were not associated with any cardiovascular-related traits.
Instead, genes like *SCD*, *LPL*, *FADS2*, *HMGCR*, and *LDLR* in LV246 showed significant associations with lipid-related traits.
The lack of association of *DGAT2* and *ACACA* in our CRISPR screen may be explained by an omnigenic perspective.
Assuming that TWAS models for *DGAT2* and *ACACA* capture all common *cis*-eQTLs and there are no rare *cis*-eQTLs, these genes may represent "core" genes that directly affect the trait without regulation by other genes, while the rest in LV246 are "peripheral" genes that regulate them.
(Figure {@fig:lv246}b)

