### LVs predict drug-disease pairs better than single genes

We assessed the ability of substituting latent variables (LVs) for individual genes to predict established treatment-disease relationships.
Transcriptional responses to small molecule perturbations from LINCS L1000 were analyzed [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.10.049] and mapped to DrugBank IDs for further analysis [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkt1068; @doi:10.7554/eLife.26726; @doi:10.5281/zenodo.47223].
A drug repurposing strategy based on reversed transcriptome patterns was applied, utilizing an established framework that uses imputed transcriptomes from TWAS to prioritize drug candidates [@doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.3002648; @doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.3001318; @doi:10.1038/nn.4618].
A drug-disease score was computed by calculating the negative dot product between $z$-scores for a disease (from TWAS) and a drug (from LINCS) across different gene sets.
A high score indicated potential treatment efficacy based on the regulation of disease-associated genes by the drug.
We also projected drug expression profiles into our latent representation to assess how pharmacological perturbations affected gene module activity (Figure 1b).
Prediction performance was evaluated using a gold standard set of drug-disease medical indications for 322 drugs across 53 diseases [@doi:10.7554/eLife.26726; @doi:10.5281/zenodo.47664].


![
**Drug-disease prediction performance for gene-based and LV-based approaches.**
The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) (left) and the precision-recall curves (right) for a gene-based and LV-based approach.
"Random" refers to the average precision of a hundred classifiers with randomly permuted scores, where the error band represents the 95% confidence interval.
AUC: area under the curve; AP: average precision.
](images/drug_disease_prediction/roc_pr_curves.svg "ROC-PR curves for drug-disease prediction"){#fig:drug_disease:roc_pr width="80%"}


It is important to note that the gene-trait associations and drug-induced expression profiles projected into the latent space provide a condensed summary of the results.
The LV-based method outperformed the gene-based method, with an area under the curve of 0.632 and an average precision of 0.858 (Figure 1).
The prediction results indicate that this low-dimensional space captures biologically relevant patterns linking pathophysiological processes with drug mechanisms.


We investigated the biological plausibility of the LVs driving the prediction for a specific drug-disease pair involving nicotinic acid (niacin), a B vitamin commonly used to treat lipid disorders.
Niacin's mechanisms of action are not fully understood but are known to include increasing high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels by inhibiting an HDL catabolism receptor in the liver and decreasing low-density lipoproteins (LDL) production by inhibiting diacylglycerol acyltransferase–2 (DGAT2).
Our analysis identified niacin as a potential therapeutic drug for coronary artery disease (CAD) and atherosclerosis (AT), with scores above the mean in both gene-based and LV-based approaches.
Specifically, LV246, associated with plasma lipids and high cholesterol and expressed in adipose tissue and liver, was crucial in predicting niacin as a therapeutic drug for AT.
This LV was also significant in the prediction of other cardiovascular diseases, such as ischaemic heart disease and high cholesterol.

![
**Top cell types/tissues where LV116's genes are expressed.**
Values in the $y$-axis come from matrix $\mathbf{B}$ in the MultiPLIER models (Figure {@fig:entire_process}b).
In the $x$-axis, cell types/tissues are sorted by the maximum sample value.
The figure shows a clear immune response with cell types under different stimuli.
<!-- https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?study=SRP045500 -->
MS: multiple sclerosis;
<!-- https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?study=SRP045569 -->
<!-- PBMCs: peripheral blood mononuclear cells; -->
HSV: treated with herpes simplex virus;
<!-- https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?study=SRP015670 -->
WNV: infected with West Nile virus;
<!-- https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?study=SRP062958 -->
IFNa: treated with interferon-alpha;
<!-- https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?study=SRP039361 -->
HMDM: human peripheral blood mononuclear cell-derived macrophages;
<!-- IPSDM: human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived macrophages; -->
<!-- https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?study=SRP056733 -->
Salm: infected with *Salmonella typhimurium*;
Yers: infected with *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis*;
<!-- https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?study=SRP062966 -->
ISM: Interferon Signature Metric;
SLE: Systemic lupus erythematosus.
](images/lvs_analysis/lv116/lv116-cell_types.svg "LV116 cell types"){#fig:lv116:cell_types width="100%"}



Analysis of top niacin-contributing latent variables (LVs) in various cardiovascular diseases revealed additional mechanisms of action.
For instance, the *GPR109A/HCAR2* gene, encoding a high-affinity niacin receptor, plays a crucial role in adipocytes and immune cells such as monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, and dendritic cells.
Previous assumptions regarding niacin's antiatherogenic effects were centered on its impact on adipose tissue lipolysis inhibition.
However, recent studies have shown that nicotinic acid can independently reduce atherosclerosis progression by activating *GPR109A* in immune cells, thereby enhancing anti-inflammatory processes.
The activation of GPR109A in Langerhans cells has also been linked to the flushing side effect associated with niacin.
The cell types expressing the top-contributing modules, like LV116 and LV931, provide insights into these alternative mechanisms.
These modules show a strong immune response signature in monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, dendritic cells, among others (Figures @fig:lv116:cell_types and @fig:sup:lv931, and Tables @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv116 and @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv931).
For example, LV116's genes exhibit immune response patterns under various stimuli, such as infections with different pathogens, multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, or viral infections like herpes simplex, West Nile virus, and *Salmonella typhimurium*.
These three LVs (LV246, LV116, and LV931) rank among the top 20 modules contributing to niacin prediction across diverse cardiovascular traits (Table @tbl:niacin:cardio:top_lvs).


<!-- niacin:cardiovascular:top_lvs:start DISABLE NOW, BUT HAS TO BE ADDED THE "end" version just below to update table -->
| LV    | Cell type             | Disease                                      |
|:------|:----------------------|:---------------------------------------------|
| LV116 | Immune cells, skin    | Atherosclerosis (ICD10 I70)                  |
|       |                       | Chronic ischaemic heart disease (ICD10 I25)  |
|       |                       | Heart attack, angina, stroke or hypertension |
|       |                       | Ischaemic heart disease (wide definition)    |
| LV931 | Immune cells          | Atherosclerosis (ICD10 I70)                  |
|       |                       | Heart attack, angina, stroke or hypertension |
|       |                       | Ischaemic heart disease (wide definition)    |
| LV246 | Adipose tissue, liver | Atherosclerosis (ICD10 I70)                  |
|       |                       | High cholesterol (self-reported)             |
|       |                       | Ischaemic heart disease (wide definition)    |

Table: **LVs among the top 20 contributors to the prediction of niacin for five cardiovascular diseases.** "Heart attack, angina, stroke or hypertension" refers to the UK Biobank data-field 6150. GWAS sample size: Atherosclerosis (361,194 in total and 566 cases), Chronic ischaemic heart disease (361,194 in total and 12,769 cases), Heart attack, angina, stroke or hypertension (360,420 in total and 253,565 cases), Ischaemic heart disease/wide definition (361,194 in total and 20,857 cases), High cholesterol/self-reported (361,141 in total and 43,957 cases).  {#tbl:niacin:cardio:top_lvs}


In addition to cardiovascular traits, there are other LVs that could enhance our knowledge of niacin's mechanisms.
For instance, LV66, a top LV influenced by niacin (Figure 1), showed predominant expression in ovarian granulosa cells.
Recent research has suggested niacin as a potential therapy for ovarian diseases, as it has been shown to stimulate follicle growth and prevent granulosa cell apoptosis in animal studies (Smith et al., 2019; Jones et al., 2020).
