### LVs reveal trait clusters with shared transcriptomic properties

![
**Cluster analysis on traits using the latent gene expression representation.**
**a)** The projection of TWAS results on 3,752 traits into the latent gene expression representation is the input data to the clustering process.
A linear (PCA) and non-linear (UMAP) dimensionality reduction techniques were applied to the input data, and five different clustering algorithms processed all data versions.
These algorithms derive partitions from the data using different parameters (such as the number of clusters), leading to an ensemble of 4,428 partitions.
Then, a distance matrix is derived by counting how many times a pair of traits was grouped in different clusters across the ensemble.
Finally, a consensus function is applied to the distance matrix to generate consolidated partitions with different numbers of clusters (from 2 to $\sqrt{n}\approx$ 60).
These final solutions were represented in the clustering tree (Figure @fig:clustering:tree).
**b)** The clusters found by the consensus function were used as labels to train a decision tree classifier on the original input data, which detects the LVs that better differentiate groups of traits.
](images/clustering/clustering_design.svg "Cluster analysis on traits"){#fig:clustering:design width="100%"}


We used the projection of gene-trait associations into the latent space to find groups of clusters linked by the same transcriptional processes.
Since individual clustering algorithms have different biases (i.e., assumptions about the data structure), we designed a consensus clustering framework that combines solutions or partitions of traits generated by different methods ([Methods](#sec:methods:clustering)).
Consensus or ensemble approaches have been recommended to avoid several pitfalls when performing cluster analysis on biological data [@doi:10.1126/scisignal.aad1932].
Since diversity in the ensemble is crucial for these methods, we generated different data versions which were processed using different methods with varying sets of parameters (Figure {@fig:clustering:design}a).
Then, a consensus function combines the ensemble into a consolidated solution, which has been shown to outperform any individual member of the ensemble [@Strehl2002; @doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2005.113].
Our clustering pipeline generated 15 final consensus clustering solutions (Figure @fig:sup:clustering:agreement).
The number of clusters of these partitions (between 5 to 29) was learned from the data by selecting the partitions with the largest agreement with the ensemble [@Strehl2002].
Instead of selecting one of these final solutions with a specific number of clusters, we used a clustering tree [@doi:10.1093/gigascience/giy083] (Figure @fig:clustering:tree) to examine stable groups of traits across multiple resolutions.
To understand which latent variables differentiated the group of traits, we trained a decision tree classifier on the input data $\hat{\mathbf{M}}$ using the clusters found as labels (Figure {@fig:clustering:design}b, see [Methods](#sec:methods:clustering)).
This approach allowed us to break through the siege of complex data structures and extract meaningful insights.


![
**Clustering tree using multiple resolutions for clusters of traits.**
Each row represents a partition/grouping of the traits, and each circle is a cluster from that partition.
The number of clusters goes from 5 to 29.
Arrows indicate how traits in one cluster move across clusters from different partitions.
Most of the clusters are preserved across different resolutions, showing highly stable solutions even with independent runs of the clustering algorithm.
<!--  -->
RDW: red cell (erythrocyte) distribution width;
BMI: body mass index;
WC: waist circumference;
HC: hip circumference;
RA: rheumatoid arthritis;
SLE: systemic lupus erythematosus;
HTN: Hypertension;
IBD: inflammatory bowel disease;
SCZ: Schizophrenia;
CAD: Coronary artery disease;
AD: Alzheimer's disease;
<!--  -->
The full lists of traits in each cluster in the last five partitions of the tree (from $k=16$ to $k=29$) are in Supplementary Data 3-7.
](images/clustering/clustering_tree.svg "Clustering tree on groups of traits"){#fig:clustering:tree width="100%"}


During our analysis, we observed that phenotypes fell into five distinct branches, each with its own unique characteristics.
The first branch, which we labeled as "large," encompassed a wide range of traits and only subdivided at $k$=16, including asthma, subjective well-being traits, and nutrient intake clusters.
The second branch focused on heel bone-densitometry measurements, while the third branch consisted of hematological assays on red blood cells, physical measures such as spirometry and body impedance, and anthropometric traits related to fat-free and fat mass.
The fourth branch, which we termed as "complex," included keratometry measurements, assays on white blood cells and platelets, skin and hair color traits, autoimmune disorders, and cardiovascular diseases.
This branch also encompassed other cardiovascular-related traits like hand-grip strength [@pmid:25982160] and environmental/behavioral factors such as physical activity and diet.
Within these branches, we noticed a stable pattern, with similar traits often clustering together across different resolutions.
The arrows between clusters indicated traits moving from one group to another, primarily occurring within the "complex" branch and between the "large" branch and the "complex" branch.
This dynamic behavior is typical in the context of complex diseases, which are often besieged by shared genetic and environmental factors, making them challenging to categorize into a single cluster.


![
**Cluster-specific and general transcriptional processes associated with different diseases.**
The plot shows a submatrix of $\hat{\mathbf{M}}$ for the main trait clusters at $k$=29, considering only LVs (rows) that are well-aligned with at least one pathway.
](images/clustering/global_clustermap-plain.svg "Heatmap with gene modules and traits"){#fig:clustering:heatmap width="100%"}


Next, we analyzed which LVs were driving these clusters of traits during the siege.
For this, we trained decision tree classifiers on the input data using each cluster at $k$=29 (bottom of Figure @fig:clustering:tree) as labels (see [Methods](#sec:methods:clustering)).
This procedure yielded the top LVs that were most discriminative for each cluster.
Several of these LVs were well-aligned to existing pathways (Figure @fig:clustering:heatmap), whereas others were not aligned to prior knowledge but still expressed in relevant tissues (Figure @fig:sup:clustering:novel:heatmap).
In Figure @fig:clustering:heatmap, it can be seen that some LVs were highly specific to certain traits, while others were associated with a wide range of different phenotypes, thus potentially involved in more general biological functions.
We used our regression framework to determine whether these LVs were significantly associated with different traits.
For example, LVs such as LV928 and LV30, which were well-aligned to early progenitors of the erythrocytes lineage [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2011.01.004] (Tables @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv928 and @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv30), were predominantly expressed in early differentiation stages of erythropoiesis (Figures @fig:sup:lv928 and @fig:sup:lv30) and strongly associated with different assays on red blood cells (FDR < 0.05; Tables @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv928, @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv928, and @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv30).
In contrast, other LVs were highly specific, such as LV730, which is expressed in thrombocytes from different cancer samples (Figure @fig:sup:lv730 and Table @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv730), and strongly associated with hematological assays on platelets (FDR < 0.05, Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv730); or LV598, whose genes were expressed in corneal endothelial cells (Figure @fig:sup:lv598 and Table @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv598) and associated with keratometry measurements (Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv598).


The sub-branches of autoimmune and cardiovascular diseases merged together at $k=10$ (middle of Figure @fig:clustering:tree), creating a stronghold or "siege" point, so we expected to find LVs that specifically affect one or both of these types of diseases.
For example, LV57, expressed in T cells (Figure @fig:sup:lv57 and Table @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv57), was the most strongly associated gene module with autoimmune disorders in PhenomeXcan (Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv57), with significant associations with hypothyroidism that were replicated in eMERGE (Table @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv57).
However, this LV was also strongly associated with deep venous thrombosis in both PhenomeXcan and eMERGE.
On the other hand, LV844 was more autoimmune-specific, with associations to polymyalgia rheumatica, type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and celiac disease in PhenomeXcan (Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv844).
However, these did not replicate in eMERGE.
This LV was expressed in a wide range of cell types, including blood, breast organoids, myeloma cells, lung fibroblasts, and different cell types from the brain (Figure @fig:sup:lv844 and Table @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv844).


The cardiovascular sub-branch had 129 significant LV-trait associations in PhenomeXcan and 23 in eMERGE, highlighting the genetic underpinnings of various cardiovascular conditions.
LV136, aligned with known collagen formation and muscle contraction pathways (Table @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv136), was associated with coronary artery disease and keratometry measurements in PhenomeXcan (Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv136).
In eMERGE, this LV was associated with coronary atherosclerosis (phecode: 411.4) (Table @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv136), indicating a genetic link to the cardiovascular siege.
LV136 was expressed in a wide range of cell types, including fibroblasts, mesenchymal stem cells, osteoblasts, pancreatic stellate cells, cardiomyocytes, and adipocytes (Figure @fig:sup:lv136), showcasing its diverse impact within the cardiovascular system.
